.. _usage:

Usage
=====

In this section we will guide you through deploying an application on top of 
Babble. Babble comes with the Dummy application which is used in this 
demonstration. It is a simple chat application where participants write 
messages on a channel and Babble guarantees that everyone sees the same messages 
in the same order.

Docker
------

We have provided a series of scripts to bootstrap a demo. Let us first use the 
easy method to view the demo and then we will take a closer look at what is 
happening behind the scenes.  

Make sure you have `Docker <https://docker.com>`__ installed.  

The demo will pull Docker images from our `official public Docker registry 
<https://hub.docker.com/u/mosaicnetworks/>`__ 

::

    [...]/babble$ cd demo
    [...]/babble/demo$ make


Once the testnet is started, a script is automatically launched to monitor 
consensus figures:  

::

    consensus_events:180 consensus_transactions:40 events_per_second:0.00 id:1 last_block_index:3 last_consensus_round:17 num_peers:3 round_events:7 rounds_per_second:0.00 state:Babbling sync_rate:1.00 transaction_pool:0 undetermined_events:18
    consensus_events:180 consensus_transactions:40 events_per_second:0.00 id:3 last_block_index:3 last_consensus_round:17 num_peers:3 round_events:7 rounds_per_second:0.00 state:Babbling sync_rate:1.00 transaction_pool:0 undetermined_events:20
    consensus_events:180 consensus_transactions:40 events_per_second:0.00 id:2 last_block_index:3 last_consensus_round:17 num_peers:3 round_events:7 rounds_per_second:0.00 state:Babbling sync_rate:1.00 transaction_pool:0 undetermined_events:21
    consensus_events:180 consensus_transactions:40 events_per_second:0.00 id:0 last_block_index:3 last_consensus_round:17 num_peers:3 round_events:7 rounds_per_second:0.00 state:Babbling sync_rate:1.00 transaction_pool:0 undetermined_events:20

Running ``docker ps -a`` will show you that 9 docker containers have been launched:  

::

    [...]/babble/demo$ docker ps -a
    CONTAINER ID        IMAGE                    COMMAND                  CREATED             STATUS              PORTS                   NAMES
    ba80ef275f22        mosaicnetworks/watcher   "/watch.sh"              48 seconds ago      Up 7 seconds                                watcher
    4620ed62a67d        mosaicnetworks/dummy     "dummy '--name=client"   49 seconds ago      Up 48 seconds       1339/tcp                client4
    847ea77bd7fc        mosaicnetworks/babble    "babble run --cache_s"   50 seconds ago      Up 49 seconds       80/tcp, 1337-1338/tcp   node4
    11df03bf9690        mosaicnetworks/dummy     "dummy '--name=client"   51 seconds ago      Up 50 seconds       1339/tcp                client3
    00af002747ca        mosaicnetworks/babble    "babble run --cache_s"   52 seconds ago      Up 50 seconds       80/tcp, 1337-1338/tcp   node3
    b2011d3d65bb        mosaicnetworks/dummy     "dummy '--name=client"   53 seconds ago      Up 51 seconds       1339/tcp                client2
    e953b50bc1db        mosaicnetworks/babble    "babble run --cache_s"   53 seconds ago      Up 52 seconds       80/tcp, 1337-1338/tcp   node2
    0c9dd65de193        mosaicnetworks/dummy     "dummy '--name=client"   54 seconds ago      Up 53 seconds       1339/tcp                client1
    d1f4e5008d4d        mosaicnetworks/babble    "babble run --cache_s"   55 seconds ago      Up 54 seconds       80/tcp, 1337-1338/tcp   node1


Indeed, each node is comprised of an App and a Babble node (cf Design section).
The ``watcher`` container monitors consensus figures.

Run the ``demo`` script to play with the ``Dummy App`` which is a simple chat application
powered by the Babble consensus platform:

::

    [...]/babble/demo$ make demo

.. image:: assets/demo.png

Finally, stop the testnet:

::

    [...]/babble/demo$ make stop

Manual Setup
------------

The above scripts hide a lot of the complications involved in setting up a 
Babble network. They generate the configuration files automatically, copy them 
to the right places and launch the nodes in Docker containers. We recommend 
looking at these scripts closely to understand how the demo works. Here, we will 
attempt to explain the individual steps that take place behind the scenes.

Configuration 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Babble reads configuration from the directory specified by the ``datadir`` flag 
which defaults to ``~/.babble`` on linux/osx. This directory must contain two 
files:

 - ``peers.json``  : Lists all the participants in the network.
 - ``priv_key.pem``: Contains the private key of the validator runnning the node. 

Every participant has a cryptographic key-pair that is used to encrypt, sign and 
verify messages. The private key is secret but the public key is used by other 
nodes to verify messages signed with the private key. The encryption scheme used 
by Babble is ECDSA with the P256 curve.

To run a Babble network, it is necessary to predefine who the participants are 
going to be. Each participant will generate a key-pair and decide which network 
address it is going to be using for the Babble protocol. Someone, or some 
process, then needs to aggregate the public keys and network addresses of all 
participants into a single file - the peers.json file. Every participant uses a 
copy of the same peers.json file. Babble will read that file to identify the 
participants in the network, communicate with them and verify their 
cryptographic signatures.

To generate key-pairs in a format usable by Babble, we have created the 
``keygen`` command. It is left to the user to derive a scheme to produce the 
configuration files but the docker demo scripts are a good place to start.

So let us say I want to participate in a Babble network. I am going to start by 
running ```babble keygen``` to create a key-pair:

::

    babble keygen
    PublicKey:
    0x0471AEE3CAE4E8442D37C9F5481FB32C4531511988652DF923B79ED4ED992021183D31E0F6FBFE96D89B6D03D7250292DFECD4FC414D83A5C38FA3FAD0D8572864
    PrivateKey:
    -----BEGIN EC PRIVATE KEY-----
    MHcCAQEEIP53jgf9lul6mvJvT8835DoDNRy7t8oIu4fU2mq2hn7ToAoGCCqGSM49
    AwEHoUQDQgAEca7jyuToRC03yfVIH7MsRTFRGYhlLfkjt57U7ZkgIRg9MeD2+/6W
    2JttA9clApLf7NT8QU2DpcOPo/rQ2FcoZA==
    -----END EC PRIVATE KEY-----
	

Then, I am going to copy the private key and paste it in a priv_key.pem file. So the content of the
priv_key.pem file would be:

::

    -----BEGIN EC PRIVATE KEY-----
    MHcCAQEEIP53jgf9lul6mvJvT8835DoDNRy7t8oIu4fU2mq2hn7ToAoGCCqGSM49
    AwEHoUQDQgAEca7jyuToRC03yfVIH7MsRTFRGYhlLfkjt57U7ZkgIRg9MeD2+/6W
    2JttA9clApLf7NT8QU2DpcOPo/rQ2FcoZA==
    -----END EC PRIVATE KEY-----


Next, I am going to copy the public key (0x0471AEE3C...) and communicate it to 
whoever is responsible for producing the peers.json file. At the same time, I 
will tell them that I am going to be listening on 172.77.5.2:1337.

Suppose three other people do the same thing. The resulting peers.json file 
could look something like this:

::

    [
	{
		"NetAddr":"172.77.5.1:1337",
		"PubKeyHex":"0x0471AEE3CAE4E8442D37C9F5481FB32C4531511988652DF923B79ED4ED992021183D31E0F6FBFE96D89B6D03D7250292DFECD4FC414D83A5C38FA3FAD0D8572864"
	},
	{
		"NetAddr":"172.77.5.2:1337",
		"PubKeyHex":"0x0448E914D5704E9018FCF1B142E63D1E7BFEE8C81C8E9285D98742671FDDE65F0C0C43A42A02BBE8ADE3DCA0A7C43B7EADA97DC58D2B907FEA2C8F26132D0CF63B"
	},
	{
		"NetAddr":"172.77.5.3:1337",
		"PubKeyHex":"0x047CCCD40D90B331C64CE27911D3A31AF7DC16C1EA6D570FDC2120920663E0A678D7B5D0C19B6A77FEA829F8198F4F487B68206B93B7AD17D7C49CA7E0164D0033"
	},
	{
		"NetAddr":"172.77.5.4:1337",
		"PubKeyHex":"0x0406CB5043E7337700E3B154993C872B1C61A84B1A739528C4A10135A3D64939C094B4A999BD21C3D5E9E9ECF15B202414F073795C9483B2F51ADA7EE59EB5EAC4"
	}
    ]

Now everyone is going to take a copy of this peers.json file and put it in a 
folder together with the priv_key.pem file they generated in the previous step. 
That is the folder that they need to specify as the datadir when they run 
Babble.

Babble Executable
-----------------

Let us take a look at the help provided by the Babble CLI:

::

    NAME:
    babble run - Run node

    USAGE:
    babble run [command options] [arguments...]

    OPTIONS:
       --datadir value       Directory for the configuration (default: "/home/martin/.babble")
       --node_addr value     IP:Port to bind Babble (default: "127.0.0.1:1337")
       --no_client           Run Babble with dummy in-memory App client
       --proxy_addr value    IP:Port to bind Proxy Server (default: "127.0.0.1:1338")
       --client_addr value   IP:Port of Client App (default: "127.0.0.1:1339")
       --service_addr value  IP:Port of HTTP Service (default: "127.0.0.1:8000")
       --log_level value     debug, info, warn, error, fatal, panic (default: "debug")
       --heartbeat value     Heartbeat timer milliseconds (time between gossips) (default: 1000)
       --max_pool value      Max number of pooled connections (default: 2)
       --tcp_timeout value   TCP timeout milliseconds (default: 1000)
       --cache_size value    Number of items in LRU caches (default: 500)
       --sync_limit value    Max number of events for sync (default: 1000)
       --store value         badger, inmem (default: "badger")
       --store_path value    File containing the store database (default: "/home/martin/.babble/badger_db")

	
So we have just seen what the ``datadir`` flag does. The ``node_addr`` flag 
corresponds to the NetAddr in the peers.json file; that is the endpoint that 
Babble uses to communicate with other Babble nodes.

As we explained in the architecture section, each Babble node works in 
conjunction with an application for which it orders transactions. Babble and the 
application are connected by a TCP interface. Therefore, we need to specify two 
other endpoints:

 - ``proxy_addr``  : where Babble listens for transactions from the App
 - ``client_addr`` : where the App listens for transactions from Babble 

We also need to specify where Babble exposes its HTTP API where one can query 
the Hashgraph data store. This is defined by the ``service_addr`` flag.

Finally, we can choose to run Babble with a database backend or only with an 
in-memory cache. By default, Babble will look for a database file in 
``~/.babble/babdger_db`` but this can be set with the ``store_path`` option. If 
the file exists, the node will load the database and bootstrap itself to a state 
consistent with the database and it will be able to proceed with the consensus 
algorithm from there. If the file does not exist yet, it will be created and the 
node will start from a clean slate. 

In some cases, it can be preferable to run Babble without a database backend. 
Indeed, even if using a database can be indispensable in some deployments, it 
has a big impact on performance. To use an in-memory store only, set the option 
``store inmem``.


Here is how the Docker demo starts Babble nodes together wth the Dummy 
application:

::

    for i in $(seq 1 $N)
    do
        docker create --name=node$i --net=babblenet --ip=172.77.5.$i mosaicnetworks/babble run \
        --cache_size=50000 \
        --tcp_timeout=200 \
        --heartbeat=10 \
        --node_addr="172.77.5.$i:1337" \
        --proxy_addr="172.77.5.$i:1338" \
        --client_addr="172.77.5.$(($N+$i)):1339" \
        --service_addr="172.77.5.$i:80" \
        --sync_limit=500
        docker cp $MPWD/conf/node$i node$i:/.babble
        docker start node$i

        docker run -d --name=client$i --net=babblenet --ip=172.77.5.$(($N+$i)) -it mosaicnetworks/dummy \
        --name="client $i" \
        --client_addr="172.77.5.$(($N+$i)):1339" \
        --proxy_addr="172.77.5.$i:1338" \
        --log_level="info"
    done

Stats, blocks and Logs
----------------------

Once a node is up and running, we can call the ``stats`` endpoint exposed by the 
HTTP service:

::

    curl -s http://172.77.5.1:80/stats
    
or request to see a specific block:

::

    curl -s http://172.77.5.1:80/block/1

Or we can look at the logs produced by Babble:

::

    docker logs node1
